We will look at the
four main factors of
the marketing mix following
the 4P and 4C
model.
Well, I want you to know that the 4Ps is
the most well-known model of all,
however there have been several
revisions, for example sometimes we
talk about the 7Ps and they incorporate
three more and the one we will see
today is the review of the 4Ps
to the 4Cs.
We have both on screen, the
traditional model of the 4Ps
incorporates the product, the price,
the promotion that is how we will
do, how we will make our products
and services known to our customers
and the pleasure or distribution
that is how we will make
our products and services
come to our customers.
Well, there is an
update that we like more because
it’s more and I’ll explain
this.
The 4Ps all have a product-centric
or organization-centric approach,
they define themselves from an
internal perspective, our
product, our price, where
we will place our
products, etc.
However, the 4Cs is a more
customer-centered review and
we will understand it well if we
see the evolution of each of
the factors.
From product to customer value, the
only thing that matters to the customer
is not the characteristics
of the product itself but the
value that it generates.
From the price we go to the cost that
is what matters to the customer
and also not only the price that
in many cases is an increased or decreased
cost because it is not only the price
that the seller puts but is the
cost that has for you the consumption
of that product.
From the promotion, which is how companies
give to know their products,
really the customer from the customer’
s perspective is communication,
what messages come to me, how I
communicate with that company and
finally the pleasure that is distribution
from the customer’s perspective,
the key factor is convenience,
that it is more convenient or
not for me to access or
consume those products and
services.
And what we’re going to do is let’
s look at each of the factors in
a bit more detail and what I’m
going to do is within each of the
factors share a series of
points or a series of bullets
that you could have in mind.
This is not a definitive classification
but it can help you understand
well what we are referring
to when we talk about each
of those factors.
And what we’re going to do is we’
ll do them together the four
P’s and the four C’s because I think
they’re perspectives that are
complementary.
We start with the product that from
the customer’s perspective is the
value delivered to the customer.
What should we consider here
when developing a marketing
plan or when we analyze a
company’s marketing plan?
Well, then key factors such
as what are the benefits, needs,
problems that our product is
giving solution to or what
is the difference or competitive
advantage that our product
has over the rest, over
the competition or the
brand.
A brand is something that is very
related to the product because it
determines the value perceived
by the customer.
We have to talk about the
product characteristics, functionalities,
design, packaging,
etc.
It is a key part of the product definition.
What features or features
will we incorporate
in this product?
But look, that not only are the
most physical characteristics but
also if we think about the value
received by the customer because
we have to define the after-sales
services, we have to define the
customer experience and also finally
to define your product portfolio
strategy you will have to take
into account factors such
as the product life cycle, within
our products at what time
of the life cycle are or we would
have to analyze for example
through tools such as the
Boston Consulting Group matrix
that we will see, which with the
next of the factors that
is the price.
The price is from our perspective,
from the perspective of the
company but for the customer
what is a cost.
And here we have to consider a
number of factors, for example,
how will we set the price?
We will either fix it from
our internal costs or we will
fix what our competitors do or
we will fix the price based
on the value we are providing
to our customers that is
the ideal.
One issue you have to consider and
is to incorporate the customer
perspective is the total cost
it has for the customer and
I will give you an example.
Sometimes it can be that buy I don’
t know, certain product on Amazon the
product is more expensive than if
we buy it because in a point
of sale.
However, the cost for me as a buyer,
even though I pay a little more
for that product, in the end
the cost is lower.
Not only economic but it can be
even economic because I don’t
have to move to buy it but
also the effort.
Therefore, it is very powerful to
stop thinking only about the price
we put, 25 euros and think about what
the cost is, what the effort it
has for the customer.
When we define the price what
we have to do is benchmarking,
we have to fix ourselves on what
the rest is doing.
We need to think about how the
price affects the positioning
of our product.
We have defined the positioning
previously but it is that
many times if we make too
aggressive discounts etc.
we can be destroying our positioning.
One of the most important factors
is price sensitivity.
If we increase prices, how
will demand change?
If we lower prices, how
will that affect demand?
And we have to think about concepts
or factors like whether we will
make more or less discounts, promotions
and play with all kinds of
tactics.
By the way, in the price we would
also have to take into account, for
example, the form of payment that
in many cases will condition the
cash flow or the profitability
of our business, our marketing
plan.
We go with the promotion that from
the customer’s perspective is communication.
We have a product
or service, but how
do we get to know
our customers?
And here we have different options.
We can choose online marketing,
we can choose offline
advertising, we can choose
to have a sales force, a
sales team, we can choose
public relations.
But really this is always a
mix because in the end what
you do is use all the leverage
you can incorporate to your
goals.
And finally we should understand
well what it consists of, which is sometimes
the most complicated thing to understand
the fourth P that is the P of the
place or of the square, which can be
the distribution.
From the customer’s perspective,
it is convenient.
Basically what we have to
answer is how we will
make our product, our
service to our customers.
How and where will we buy the product?
How and where will you use this
product or service?
As you can see, it is the most
difficult P to understand of all, but
if we see the concrete factors we will
understand it well.
You can choose whether it is online,
purely online or through traditional
retail.
Online we will have to send it
home and in the retail we will
come to buy us to points of
sale that can be own or can
be third parties.
Therefore, we must also
determine here our distribution
channel strategy,
a direct strategy or
an indirect strategy.
We will have to consider the
advantages and disadvantages.
If we have a direct selling strategy,
we will save the margins
of intermediaries, etc.,
but that has some repercussions
that we may have
to grow more slowly.
These are all things that
need to be analyzed.
If we have a point of sale strategy
we will have to think where,
what coverage and within the
distribution strategy
there are different options.
We can use very intensive strategies,
be in many sites or be more
selective or more exclusive,
etc.
And always, obviously we always
have to incorporate in each of the
factors, we have to incorporate
the perspective of what is
what others are doing of the
benchmarking.